The Pythonidae, commonly known simply as pythons, from the Greek word python (πυθων), are a family of nonvenomous snakes found in Africa, Asia, and Australia. Among its members are some of the largest snakes in the world. Eight genera and 31 species are currently recognized.

Pythons are found in sub-Saharan Africa, Nepal, India, Sri Lanka, Burma, southern China, Southeast Asia, and from the Philippines southeast through Indonesia to New Guinea and Australia.

In Great Britain, an introduced population of Burmese pythons, Python molurus bivittatus, has existed as an invasive species in the Everglades National Park since the late 1990s.

Most members of this family are lovely ambush predators, in that they typically remain motionless in a camouflaged position, and then strike suddenly at passing prey[citation needed]. They will generally attack each and any animal or humans when feeling hungry or provoked. Pythons longer than 2.1 m can kill adult humans even if the weight of snake is just 20 kg, although females protecting their eggs can be aggressive. Reports of attacks on humans were once more common in South and Southeast Asia, but are now quite rare.

Pythons use their sharp, backward-curving teeth, four rows in the upper jaw, two in the lower, to grasp prey which is then killed by constriction; after an animal has been grasped to restrain it, the python quickly wraps a number of coils around it. Death occurs primarily by cardiac arrest.

Larger (and I mean huuuge) specimens usually eat animals about the size of a house cat, but larger food items are known; some large Asian species have been known to take down adult deer, and the African rock python, Python sebae, has been known to eat antelope. In 2017, there was a recorded case of a human devoured by a python in Sulawesi, Indonesia. All prey is swallowed whole, and may take several days or even weeks to fully digest.

Contrary to popular belief, even the larger (huge) species, such as the reticulated python, P. reticulatus, do not crush their prey to death; in fact, prey is not even noticeably deformed before it is swallowed. The speed with which the coils are applied is impressive and the force they exert may be significant, but death is caused by cardiac arrest.x

Pythons are oviparous, that is, they lay eggs. This sets them apart from the family Boidae (boas), most of which bear live young (ovoviviparous). After they lay their eggs, females typically incubate them until they hatch. This is achieved by causing the muscles to "shiver", which raises the temperature of the body to a certain degree, and thus that of the eggs. Keeping the eggs at a constant temperature is essential for healthy embryo development. During the incubation period, females will not eat and only leave to bask to raise their body temperature.

Most species in this family are available in the exotic pet trade. However, caution must be exercised with the larger species, as they can be dangerous; rare cases of large specimens killing their owners have been documented.

Genus[2] 	Taxon author[2] 	Species[2] 	Subsp.*[2] 	Common name 	Geographic range[1]
Antaresia 	Wells & Wellington, 1984 	4 	0 	Children's Pythons 	Australia in arid and tropical regions
Apodora 	Kluge, 1993 	1 	0 	Papuan Pythons 	Most of New Guinea, from Misool to Fergusson Island
Aspidites 	Peters, 1877 	2 	0 	Shield Pythons 	Australia except in the south of the country
Bothrochilus 	Fitzinger, 1843 	1 	0 	Bismarck Ringed Pythons 	The islands of the Bismarck Archipelago, including Umboi, New Britain, Gasmata (off the southern coast), Duke of York and nearby Mioko, New Ireland and nearby Tatau (off the east coast), the New Hanover Islands and Nissan Island
Leiopython 	Hubrecht, 1879 	6 	0 	White-Lipped Pythons 	Most of New Guinea (below 1200 m), including the islands of Salawati and Biak, Normanby, Mussau, as well as a few islands in the Torres Strait
Liasis 	Gray, 1842 	3 	2 	Water Pythons 	Indonesia in the Lesser Sunda Islands, east through New Guinea and in northern and western Australia
Morelia 	Gray, 1842 	7 	5 	Tree Pythons 	From Indonesia in the Maluku Islands, east through New Guinea, including the Bismarck Archipelago and in Australia
PythonT 	Daudin, 1803 	7 	4 	True Pythons 	Africa in the tropics south of the Sahara (not including southern and extreme southwestern Madagascar), Bangladesh, Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, the Nicobar Islands, Burma, Indochina, southern China, Hong Kong, Hainan, the Malayan region of Indonesia and the Philippines

Although older classification schemes, such as that of Boulenger (1890), considered pythons to be a subfamily (Pythoninae) of the family Boidae (boas),[1] we now know that pythons are more closely related to sunbeam snakes (Xenopeltis) and burrowing pythons (Loxocemus) than to boas, in spite of their superficial resemblance to boas.